1	INTRODUCTION
1.1	PURPOSE
The purpose of the FRS is to get a common understanding between the customer and PDSL on the product requirements of the Platform-i MSN application. The document serves as a basis for the Architectural Design of the Platform-i MSN application.
1.2	SCOPE
The intended audience for this document are the customer and the development team. 
1.3	OPEN POINTS
User Interface.
1.4	REQUIREMENTS IDENTIFICATION
The requirements will be in the format: <label><number>
1.5	DOCUMENT MAINTENANCE
Additional requirements can only be added at the end of a section with the next higher number.
If a requirement is removed, the number remains empty.

1.6	DEFINITIONS, ACRONYMS & ABBREVIATIONS
Definitions:
- Instant Messenger	
An instant messenger is an application, which allows instant text communication between two or more people through a network such as the Internet. 
- Status	
Predefined presence identifier. With setting the status the user can let others know if he is actively using your PC (or TV in our case). In MSN Messenger you have the following statuses: Offline, Online, Busy, Idle, Be Right Back, Away, On the Phone and Out to Lunch.
- Blocking	
When you block someone, you prevent that person from seeing your status (you always appear offline) and sending you messages.
- Buddy	
Friend, family member, co-worker or other person who is manually added to your buddy list.
- Buddy list	
List of buddies with whom the user can communicate in real time.
- Contact list	
See buddy list.
- Passport	
.NET Passport is an online service that makes it possible for you to use your e-mail address and a single password to sign in to any .NET Passport-participating Web site or service. One of these services is the MSN Messenger.

Acronyms and abbreviations:
IM		Instant Messenger
MHP		Multimedia Home Platform
MSN		Microsoft Network

1.7	REFERENCES



2	 GENERAL DESCRIPTION
2.1	PRODUCT PERSPECTIVE
The MSN messenger xlet is a MHP version of the popular PC application. It is an application to demonstrate the possibilities of MHP and Platform-i. 
The Platform-i MSN messenger application is independent of other projects.

2.2	PRODUCT(S)
The produced product will be an MHP MSN messenger xlet.
2.2.1	MSN messenger xlet
With the xlet the user shall be able to see online friends, chat with them and see which TV program they are watching. Unlike the PC variant, the xlet cannot transfer files and doesn’t have webcam support.

2.3	USER CHARACTERISTICS
There are only end-users. 

2.4	ASSUMPTIONS & CONSTRAINTS
If we cannot use the MSN messenger service protocol this FRS has to be adjusted to reflect the new situation.



3	FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
3.1	END USER FUNCTIONS
3.1.1	Presence
P1.0 Use of Passport to login to the messenger
P1.1 With the use of an existing Passport account the user can login to the messenger.
P1.2 It is not possible to create a new Passport account.

P2.0 Maintenance of users own status
P2.1 Ability to change and maintain the status which is visible to the buddies. The application provides a list where the end-user can choose the new status.

P3.0 See the presence status of your buddies
P3.1 The application will display the status of the end-users buddies. 
P3.2 When a buddy changes his status, the application shall update it.

P4.0 Own Nickname
P4.1 The end-user is able to change the nickname with which the user is visible to the buddies.

P5.0 Nickname of buddies
P5.1 Show the nicknames of the end-users buddies on the buddy list. 
P5.2 The application updates the displayed nick in the contact list when a buddy changes the nickname.

P6.0 Appoint an user-defined nickname
P6.1 The application provides the possibility to assign a nickname to a specified buddy; this nickname has preference above the nickname set by the buddy itself.

P7.0 Add buddies to your contact list
P7.1 The application provides an option to add a buddy to the buddy list. 

P8.0 Delete buddies from your contact list
P8.1 The application has an option to delete a buddy from the buddy list.

P9.0 Blocking a buddy
P9.1 The application has an option to block certain buddies.


3.1.2	Messaging
M1.0 Incoming message notification
M1.1 The application has a visible notification when an incoming message is received.

M2.0 Read incoming messages
M2.1 Show incoming messages on the screen.

M3.0 Write a message
M3.1 Possibility to create a message and send it to a buddy.

M4.0 Emoticons in messages
M4.1 Show emoticons in incoming and outgoing messages. 
M4.2 Display a list of emoticons to choose from when the user wants to include an emoticon in the message he is writing.

M5.0 Show (session) history
M5.1 Show the history of messages sent and received in the current chat session.

M6.0 Group conversation
M6.1 Chat with multiple buddies together.


3.1.3	Miscellaneous
D1.0 TV program
D1.1 Ability to request the TV program / channel to which the end-users online buddy is watching at the moment.

D2.0 New mail notification
D2.1 Show a notification when there is new e-mail at the users hotmail inbox.

D3.0 Check your hotmail account 
D3.1 Display the inbox of the users Hotmail account
D3.2 Show e-mails from the users Hotmail account on the screen.

D4.0 Play games
D4.1 Play games with online buddies.



4	EXTERNAL INTERFACE REQUIREMENTS
4.1	PHYSICAL DEVICES
Input device: Remote control and maybe a wireless keyboard.
Output device: TV screen.


4.2	COMMUNICATION INTERFACES
The used protocol for communication is the .NET messenger service protocol. The used version of this protocol will be MSNPv8 which is the standard protocol at this moment.


4.3	DATA REQUIREMENTS
Not applicable.
